[Music]
so what do you imagine when someone says
let's go to the seaside definitely not a
vacation in the desert right well Never
Say Never
because there is a project to make the
Sahara Desert a literal resort keep
watching to find out more but before you
grab those floaties hit the subscribe
button and ring the notification icon to
always stay in the know right here on
the bright side now I'm sure you're
aware by now that the Sahara is the
largest hot desert in the world located
in North Africa its area is a whopping
3.5 million square miles which is almost
the size of the whole United States
actually the lower 48 could easily fit
into the Sahara with room to spare we
know it to be a scorching hot place
where very few life forms can survive
full of sand and more sand what few
people know however is that it hasn't
always been like that
every 41,000 years the Sahara turns into
a savanna grassland thanks to the
movement of the Earth's axis its next
change of landscape is gonna happen
15,000 years from now but there is an
idea that can make this process not just
faster but different altogether it's
called the Sahara Sea project actually
the Sahara Sea project has been around
for over a century
the first concept appeared in 1877 when
Scottish entrepreneur Donald Mackenzie
proposed to turn the algae of basin of
the Sahara Desert into an inland sea he
wanted to dig a channel to direct the
water from the actual sea to the basin
flooding the area the result he was
expecting was a vast body of water in
the middle of the Sahara geologists
found that the basin he thought to flood
had once been connected to the Atlantic
Ocean the project just remained in the
idea stage though the following year two
French activists francois le roi Dare
and Ferdinand de Lesseps suggested a
similar idea for the shot Alfie Gigi
another basin in the desert
wanted to dig a channel from the
Mediterranean Sea that would fill the
area with water and turn the Sahara into
a lush land well supposedly at least
it's interesting that even Jules Verne
was fascinated by the idea of creating a
sea inside the world's greatest desert
he wrote to adventure novels in 1877 in
1905 that dwelled on the matter and
referred directly to Road errand de
lesseps plan in his last book though the
sea was created naturally after a
powerful earthquake struck the continent
and filled the desert with water
both of these basins have been chosen
because their bottoms are below sea
level making them perfect for creating
an artificial sea and both ideas were
ultimately rejected because it was later
discovered that this in fact wasn't true
instead of a green and lovely landscape
the activists had pictured for
themselves chances were that this era
would have turned into a huge swamp that
would spread disease a nasty picture
indeed the proposal however wasn't lost
entirely and people continued thinking
of what could be done about that
enormous area of sand dunes under the
scorching Sun in the 20th century the
idea of turning parts of the desert into
a sea was brought up twice more both
projects rejected yet again the first of
the attempts to return to this issue was
made in 1910 by the French professor
Edmund H ago and he was sure that an
inland sea inside the Sahara would
improve the climate in Europe sounds
pretty selfish doesn't it anyway
although the French government gave a
Chileans idea some thought in the end
they decided against his proposal the
main reason was that much of the Sahara
was actually above sea level which would
make the artificial sea irregular and
full of bays and coves not to mention
it'd be a lot smaller than echa Guin has
suggested plus the effect on the climate
wasn't guaranteed to be a good one
nobody wants to have a marsh the size of
the US somewhere on the planet you know
picky picky it's worth mentioning though
that engineers in Southern California
actually created an artificial lake in
five purely by accident they released
the waters of the Colorado River into a
dry Basin the water filled it and made a
new Salt Lake that's now called the
Salton Sea it's become a lot smaller
over time since then but it's still the
largest lake in California if that
doesn't count as a success then I don't
know what does
the Sahara Seas project second comeback
was called on by members of operation
plowshare they proposed to blow up
several explosives in the middle of the
desert to create a basin that would then
fill with water you can probably imagine
why this idea wasn't well-received the
whole concept actually makes your eyes
even bigger when you realize the sheer
scale of the proposed project just think
of it operation plowshare suggested that
213 atomic bombs be detonated to make a
new channel through the Sahara
of course this scared everyone on the
African continent and probably beyond
and the project was abandoned for good
and still there are new plans to develop
the Sahara Sea project there have been
several initiatives in the 21st century
but the most promising one is called the
sea in the desert its idea is to flood
shot Algeria one of the shallow salt
lakes in southern Tunisia this would
create about 2300 square miles of
artificial sea that might not sound too
grand compared to the projects of the
past but it would help in more ways than
one
first of all such a large body of water
in the middle of a desert will
definitely affect the surrounding
climate and ecosystem I know I know what
about that big disease spreading squishy
swamp you mentioned earlier glad you
were listening well don't forget that
technology has come a very long way
since the 19th century these guys today
know what they're doing so the authors
of the projects strongly believe they
can literally make the Desert Bloom the
main theory is that evaporating waters
would trigger rainfall which given some
time would make the soil fertile and
that obviously would allow plants to
grow now this would take a huge amount
of work most of which can only be
done by people not machines wouldn't
that be a bad thing you asked not at all
you see Tunisia has a really high
unemployment rate and such a gigantic
project would make the country's economy
skyrocket by providing jobs for
approximately 60,000 people how cool is
that
here's another benefit to consider since
Tunisia is a really tourist oriented
country the creation of an artificial
sea in the middle of the Sahara will
boost tourism like nothing else imagine
coming to the desert expecting to see
sand and dunes from miles around and
finding a seaside resort instead
complete with a five-star hotel palm
trees and a beautiful beach sweet yeah
the country's government agrees and last
but not least the project would
kickstart a lot of things in these newly
green desert lands farming forestry fish
farming you name it as long as it starts
with F the humid climate around the
artificial sea would allow locals to
farm the lands all year long making a
huge impact on the economy of the
country and yet again this would create
thousands of jobs it's totally a win-win
and it only gets better the sea in the
desert project suggests there will be
alternative energy generators installed
after the main job is done this means
the whole thing will not only be a
positive force in the desert it'll also
bring lots of benefits to the
environment solar panels on dry land and
turbines in the water of the channel
will give much-needed green energy to
the whole area making it safe and
sustainable so that's the Sahara Sea for
you if we're lucky enough we'll soon see
how the desert we've known as the most
formidable body of dry and lifeless land
in the world becomes a lush landscape
with a whole new sea right in the middle
of it and who knows maybe that success
will bring a new chain of desert
flooding initiatives all over the planet
well bright ciders would you like to
visit a resort in the heart of the ser a
desert one day let us know in the
comments below don't forget to give this
video a thumbs up
with your friends and click Subscribe to
always stay on the bright side of life